---
slug: correct-cookie-setting
stages:
  - launch
short_description: When you store cookies on your website, do not forget to correctly set their storage. In some cases, consent is required. However, in every time, do not forget to inform users about storage and purpose.
tags:
  - cookie policy
  - cookie setting
  - cookies
  - legal
  - software law
  - privacy policy
keywords:
  - cookie policy
  - cookie setting
  - cookies
  - legal
  - software law
  - privacy policy
  - sedlakovalegal
covered_by_dx_scanner: false
---

# Correct Cookies Setting

**TL;DR**

When you store cookies on your website, do not forget to correctly set their storage. In some cases, consent is required. However, in every time, do not forget to inform users about storage and purpose.

## What Is Correct Cookies Setting?

Cookies are small data generated by website and browser saves this data. They are used for several purposes, e. g. saving inserted data, remembering used language or shopping cart, using it for marketing purposes or analytics. It is clear that by saving this small data, the privacy of users is being affected. In this case, the electronic privacy should be protected. European union settled how cookies should be set on website by so called e-Privacy directive. In this directive the cookies may be saved in user browser only with his active consent (opt-in option).

However, due to the fact that it is only directive, member states have to adopt national laws to implement this duty. And some countries did it wrongly. Like the Czech Republic. In this country, it is possible to store cookies even without user consent (websites should only allow the user to disagree with the collection – so called opt-out option).

Correct cookie setting is correct process of setting the storage of cookies on the website, so the conditions applicable by law are met.

## Why You Might Want Correct Cookie Setting?

To comply with EU law and national laws, it is necessary to set-up correctly consent screen for usage of cookies. Although it looks pretty simply, there may be some difficulties during correct cookie setting. There are several laws that will apply on saving and processing data gathered through cookies.

The laws simply state, that you may store cookies only with the consent of user. There are some exceptions like storing so called technical cookies. For storing technical cookies, there is no necessity to require consent. Typical example are cookies used for language preferences, cookies for storing products in shopping cart etc. For other cookies (like marketing or analytics), the consent is required.

As stated above, cookie setting is governed by e-Privacy directive. Directive is one of the acts that is issued by EU. Directive sets out obligation for states to implement or adopt national law where the duties (that are stated in directive) will be dealt with. According to this, every state has to adopt national law and laws may vary in different states (directive only harmonizes legal orders). Due to this fact, in some states in EU, there may be different duties in cookie setting. For example, in Czech Republic you do not need active consent for storage of cookies, because the EU e-Privacy directive was badly implemented. However, changes are coming, and the novelization of national act should be in force soon.

However, it is very important to set cookies correctly, because in every state, there is some supervisory authority that check if you are in compliance with law.

## Problems the Correct Cookie Setting Helps to Solve

By correct cookie setting:

- You will comply with applicable laws
- You may process data gathered though cookies
- You are able to provide relevant authorities that you are in compliance
- Users will trust your website more

## How to Implement the Correct Cookie Setting?

Correct cookie setting requires active consent of user. When you develop website, do not forget to correctly implement functionality for cookie consent. On the website, there should be banner, screen or other functionality that allows users to give consent.

The consent should be in accordance with law (mainly GDPR) and shall be presented in a manner which is clearly distinguishable from the other matters, in an intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language. Consent should be free, informed, specific and active.

### Free

User cannot be forced to give consent with storage of cookies. Typical example where user is forced is cookies wall. This cookie wall means that user is not able to go through website if he/she does not agree with cookie storage. User also should have option not to agree with storage of cookies.

### Informed

You have to inform users about cookies storage, how long cookies will be stored in browser, for what purposes you will use the cookies and what cookies are used on website. All this information should be easily accessible on website and when the user is giving consent.

### Specific

There are several types of cookies used for several types of purposes. User should have option to choose for what purposes he/she will give consent. If you use cookies for marketing, analysis and personalization of content, you have to give user chance to choose for which purpose is consent given.

### Active

Consent should be given by active action of user (clicking on check-box, slider, clicking on “I agree” etc.).

Due to the fact, that you need to prove that consent was given, you have to make a record about it. Supervisory authority may ask you to submit a log or other record where is stated that user gave you consent.

Do not forget that user has to have option at any time to withdraw the consent. Simply, user should have chance to change his setting of cookie saving on website.

Where to get inspiration? Check website www.ico.org.uk (UK supervisory authority). It is very good example of how cookie setting should be made.

If you are from Czech Republic (and your website target only Czech market), a specific rule will apply. You do not have to ask for consent. Under the guidelines of Czech supervisory authority, if user has set his browser to allow cookie saving, he/she express consent. You should only inform user about cookie storage (see requirement for consent to information) and inform them about how to set browser to reject saving cookies. Although, if you decide to use consent for cookie storage, you have to abide rules stated above.

Do not also forget that in cookies, personal data may also be stored. If you want to process them, you have to abide all rules stated in GDPR.

## Common Pitfalls of the Correct Cookie Setting

- There are used cookie walls on website – user cannot use the website without giving consent. The consent screen takes up the entire space of the website and it is impossible to browse web page.
- The consent is not active – website inform users that by scrolling on website, user agree with cookie storage. This is inappropriate, because this is not active action (well, it is, but it is not certain that ser is giving his consent)
- All types of cookies are under one consent – website stores more different types of cookies for different purposes and only asks for one consent for all cookies. Do not forget that for different purposes, separate consent should be given.
- Users are not informed about cookie storage – website sometimes only states that there are cookies on website… Inform users about period of storage, purposes, types of cookies, parties with which cookies are shared etc.
- Different state – different law – check laws of countries on which the website is targeting and check what are the conditions for cookie storage (see e.g. Czech Republic where specific rules apply)

## Resources

- [ePrivacy directive](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32002L0058)
- [ICO](https://ico.org.uk)
- [EDPB guidelines on consent under GDPR](https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/nasoki/guidelines-052020-consent-under-regulation-2016679_en)
- You can get more information about Cookies from the [SEDLAKOVALEGAL agency](https://sedlakovalegal.com/)
